---
layout: post
title: I See Three
subtitle: Setting a framework
---

## 001: 

**Coming on five** years of putting out EP material. There have been a variety of techniques, visuals, and tools used. Predictably, the topics have revolved around craft beer. The two other prevelant topics have been books and boxing. I like to keep my interests to one letter. The time and energy required, and available, has generally pointed me towards one-off posts. Themes recur and topics are revisited but any coherence is usually present in retrospect. 

None of the time or energy constraints have changed markedly. While effectively under the same restrictions I wish to alter my approach, at least for some dedicated near term window. Many of the previous motivations (practicing my skills, exposing myself to new data sets, applying machine learning techniques, and finding ways of visualizing take-aways) remain. I simply want to direct them towards a more consistent goal.

In an effort to continue doing the side project work I have found so entertaining and also build something more substantial, something that extends beyond a couple of posts, I have turned my attention to punting. On boxing. The two together are a natural fit for my continued data science-y pursuits. Many of the techniques and tools previously implemented are applicable. Some old scripts will be dusted off. Even so, whole lot of learning and mistakes will be had. 

This will be an iterative process. I will be learning as I go along, learning by doing. I will undoubtedly be making statements and pursuing avenues that will make me look like a fool. If I am lucky and persistent one of the people to identify these foolish pursuits will be my future self. To that end, I will outline the way I currently see the "problem" at hand. This would appear to be a three-part process that feeds in on one another:

* handicapping
* market prices
* bankroll management

Each of these will be discussed in further detail and in turns in the weeks and months to come. _Handicapping_ is about coming up with a "secret sauce" to help determine the odds on any given bout. _Market prices_ refers to what lines can be found at various books, their movement and any limits (which will hardly be a consideration in the beginning, or ever?). Lastly, _bankroll management_ has to do with the amount, or rather percentage, of available funds to put at risk, whether there is any value in a given fight, and some attention to emotions and cognitive biases. 
